---
layout: post_page
title: Intro and community bonding period
---

Where to begin... well the project title is already written on top of the post index, but let me mention it once more, along with the complete definition offered in the project ideas page:

### An ultra-fast scalable RESTful API to query large numbers of genomic variations ###

*VCF files are the typical output of genome resequencing projects (http://www.1000genomes.org/node/101). They store the information on all the mutations and variations (SNPs and InDels) that are found by comparing the outputs of a NGS platform with a reference genome. These files are not incredibly large (a typical uncompressed VCF file is few gigabytes) but they are full with information on millions of positions in the genome where mutations are found. Large resequencing projects can produce hundreds or thousands of these files, one for each sample sequenced.*
*Existing tools (such as VCFTools or BCFTools) offer a convenient way to access these files and extract or convert the information present, but are limited in functionalities and speed when more complex queries need to be performed on these data. With existing tools it is very complicated, if not impossibile, to retrive information when working on many VCF files and samples together to compare, for instance, the variations found in 100 samples and extract all the mutations that are present in 50 samples but are not present in the other 50 and so on.*

### My proposal: ###

Since the major pain-point addressed by this proposal seemed to be the need to answer questions that require - in SQL-speak - JOINs to be ansewered, my proposal was to try to leverage as much as possible the NoSQL DBMS (the proposed approach already mentioned using such systems) to perform the computation. By that I mean that, since most NoSQL databases offer some sort of mapreduce facility, instead of building our own solution from scratch we could use what the DBMS already offers and try to make it fit our needs.
Of course there are tradeoffs involved, but my impression was that  the other benefits (decent memory management and sharding for free, for example) would be worth the potential (and hopefully small) inefficiencies introduced.

But in any case all these assuptions needed to be verified (do nosql dbms' are really handy enough? do people really need sharding? etc..), and this brings us to the first period of the Google Summer of Code:


The communinity bonding period
------------------------------

During the bonding period the goal was for me to get a better understanding of the context in which bioinformaticians use VCF files.

For this reason my first objectives were to find out:

1. What's inside a VCF file (both syntactically and semantically).
2. What VCF file usage usually involves.
3. What kind of queries are at the moment hard to answer using existing tools.

I'm going to write about each point as a separate post, since I'm hoping to use each description as a *proof-of-aknowlegment* (meaning: if it's written, then I know about it, otherwise you should assume I don't) in order make sure no relevant use-case gets left behind.







